Welcome back, my friends. Dr. Ken Berry
here with you once again. I have the
distinct honor of having probably one of
the most learned individuals that I've
ever had on this channel.
Uh it's a great honor and privilege to
welcome Dr. Dr. Thomas Seyfried. He has
taught at Yale University, Boston
College. He has over 150
published papers and book chapters
uh dealing with cancer and the fact, in
my opinion, that cancer is at least
predominantly
a metabolic disease. It is not
uh a genetic disease to any meaningful
degree.
Uh and we're going to we're going to
talk about this at length and we're live
in my private group. And so, our 5,400
members are going to have
first dibs access to ask Dr. Seyfried
questions.
And as I see a good question roll by,
I'll pull that up and we'll take
questions from the tribe members. And uh
we'll hear what Dr. Seyfried has to say
about that. So, without further ado,
Doctor, welcome. Thank you so much for
doing this.
Oh, thank you very much, Ken. It's nice
to be here today.
Excellent. So,
let's let's start this. Uh I've already
already kind of spoke about your
bonafides. Let's let's get started with
how are we doing in the war on cancer?
Let's just start from a 50,000-ft
perspective. Are we winning the war on
cancer? What How do How do the rates of
cancer uh the incidence What about
survival? Tell us where we're at in this
war on cancer that we declared decades
ago. Yeah. Well, thank you very much.
You know, um
every year the American Cancer Society
comes out with their report card uh on
the war.
Uh how we're doing. Uh it's published
generally in around January end of
January, early February projecting for
the following year.
And it and year in and year out, uh we
get we're getting more dead people. Um
the the incidence is increasing much
faster, of course, than the number of
dead people. But the number of dead
people per year is also increasing.
So, right now, um
if you look at the latest statistics,
it's about 1,670
people a day
uh are dying from cancer
uh day in and day out. In the United
States.
In the United States. Yeah, and and
different countries
um of course, it all seems to be linked
to the number of people in the
population. So, Chinese, I think, has
about 8,100 people a day dying from
cancer because they have a much much
larger population than we do. But um it
seems like everywhere in modern
societies, let's put it that way,
Western societies, uh cancer incidence
and deaths are continuing to elevate. Um
and you know, we look at all this
information.
And uh as I said, breast cancer now,
according to the most recent uh from uh
the American Cancer Society, has now
replaced heart disease as the number one
killer of American women.
So, um it's always been predicted that
at some point cancer is going to surpass
heart disease.
Uh well, it's it's creeping. It's biting
at the heels of heart disease. Already
for breast cancer it's support
surpassed. And I think in the next
several years,
uh you're going to see it surpass all or
it'll be the number one cause of death
uh for people in Western societies.
That's crazy. And for years I've told
women, cuz you know, the breast cancer
lobby or whatever you want to call it
has had a great marketing success. And
so, many women would come to me at the
clinic and be worried about breast
cancer. And I would have to redirect
them and say, "No, no, you really what
you need to be worried about is heart
disease because that actually has a
greater chance of killing you." And so,
what you're saying is is if the rates of
cancer
uh incidents and death keep increasing,
I'm going to have to modify my advice to
my female patients to say, "No, you're
right. Cancer is that that is the number
one killer." Yeah, and and and and it it
comes from uh the American Cancer
Society.
Uh they're the they're the society
that's logging the dead.
You know, that's that's predominantly
what they do.
Uh they they have a very sophisticated
statistical staff that keep track. And
and it's very hard um
Susan Wadia Els in her book Busting
Breast Cancer
uh
went through and how how difficult it
actually was
to collect statistics on the number of
people dying
from cancer, breast cancer. And she
finds it also ambiguous
uh from the American Cancer Society is
how they actually get these numbers. It
may even be bigger and greater than what
we we actually think it is. It's very
hard to get these kinds of numbers. And
because sometimes people uh
take um a drug or something and kills
them real quick for cancer management.
Um did they die from So, what what the
term is often used, died from the
complications of cancer. And when you
hear died from the complications of
cancer, which you hear quite often,
uh that's when the drug cancer drugs
killed the patient before the tumor did.
So, uh whenever you hear died from the
complica- And that's not an insig-
That's not a rare statement.
It's not rare. When you say individual
died from the complications of cancer,
means the treatments killed them.
So,
between that and the number of people
actually dying from the disease, you
know, you have a lot of a lot of people
here.
And a lot of people don't are not aware
of this. And and to put it kind of use,
you know, general language,
chemotherapy is poison.
And any oncologist will tell you this.
And so, the goal of chemotherapy
is for the chemotherapy to be slightly
more toxic to the cancer cells than it
is to the human. And so, the the goal is
to kill the cancer cells it before you
kill the human. But in many cases with a
with a misplaced calculation or either
of the the dosage or of the patient's
ability to tolerate chemotherapy, you
absolutely chemo chemotherapy can be a
deadly poison. And I'm not advocating
against following your oncologist's
guidelines. That's not what I'm saying.
I'm just saying you have to understand
that's what it is. It's just hopefully
more poison
to the cancer than it is to the patient.
No, that's true. That's true. And and
some people die real quick because their
bodies are so sensitive to this chemo.
And then the people that kind of survive
are the ones that have are the most
resistant to the chemo.
So, uh but whatever I agree with you
100%. You're poisoning somebody.
Yeah.
Uh you know, why would you want to do
that? Why would what one human being do
that to another human being? It's kind
of malpractice, if you ask me. Uh
especially when you have other
other approaches based on hard science.
Like it's
You know, why why are we doing that when
we don't really need to do it?
And so, there is there is hard science
that strongly supports that cancer is a
metabolic disease. But if you talk to
any oncologist, any health guru out
there,
what's going to roll off their lips is
that cancer is predominantly genetic. We
don't really understand, you know, a lot
of it's idiopathic, which it just
happens. We don't really understand why.
Maybe there's radiation insults. Maybe
there's, you know, I was taught in med-
medical school that it was a multi-hit
phenomenon. That, you know, you got a
little too much radiation. You were
exposed to the wrong chemical. Maybe
often diet wasn't mentioned, but you and
I both know that's a big deal. But with
enough hits to a cell, to the DNA in the
cell, then boom, there you go. Now you
have a cancerous cell. And what what So,
I was going to ask this question later,
but I I think it's pertinent now.
Obviously, from the data you just
relate, we're we're losing the war on
cancer. Or at least we're not winning.
Yeah.
And the predominant
theory or model or hypothesis is that it
cancer is a genetic disease.
And every day all of us see advertised
on television and in magazines this new
cancer therapy, this new drug. That that
new drug.
But why are
cancer researchers and oncologists, why
are they so resistant if they're not
winning?
Right? Cuz if you're winning, you don't
want to hear anything else. But we're
losing.
Why are they so resistant
Yeah.
thinking of cancer as a metabolic
disease, to to looking at the the over
150 papers that you've published and
other people have published, Otto
Warburg. Why Why are they so resistant
to that in your opinion?
Well, I I think it's as I say in many of
my
it's a dogma. It's a it's an irrefutable
truth, a silent assumption.
Uh when when the leading scientists,
many several have have received the
Nobel Prize
uh for their work
um uh driving the research juggernaut
industry
from the National Institutes of Health,
as well as all of the National Health
Service from England and all of the
National Health Organizations throughout
the world in Western medicine
uh
have bought on
to this idea that cancer is a genetic
disease. Um
and the dogma has become solidified in
textbooks and lectures and every major
textbook of science that the students
will read, cancer is a genetic disease.
If you go to the National Cancer
Institute website right now
and look up what cancer is, you will see
a big sign, "Cancer is a genetic
disease." So, the National Cancer
Society, NCI, and the NIH
uh
deal out
thousands and thousands of research
grants uh
every year to scientists all over this
country and other countries studying
gene sequencing,
looking at mutations in various
types of cancers. We we have an industry
now with the immunotherapies,
which is the new form of of treating
cancer, the
Opdivo, Keytruda, all these things you
hear on TV.
They're all based on the somatic
mutation theory of cancer. So, it has
become an irrefutable truth, something
that's no longer questioned. So, the
established
science field views cancer as a genetic
disease. The The folks, as you mentioned
at the beginning, the folks on the
street
don't know. They're not They're not They
just assume that the guys running the
National Institute of Cancer, that the
Dana-Farber, MD Anderson, Sloan
Kettering,
all these guys can't be wrong. How could
they be wrong when they're when they're
treating thousands and thousands of
people? All the textbooks say it's a
genetic disease. NCI says it's a genetic
disease. The Germans, the Japanese, the
English, the the French all say it's a
genetic disease. And I we come along and
say it can't be a genetic disease. The
evidence is overwhelming against it.
And they would just assume not listen to
it.
The pharmaceutical companies are already
bracing for a trillion-dollar industry
in the future
based on the cancer is a genetic
disease. So,
this is a
momentum. It's some sort of incredible
momentum that that are that is ending up
brutalizing tens of thousands of people
being tortured and and and treated
for by strategies that are not based on
the hard science. What I have simply
done is peeled back the the layers of
the onion and looked deep into this
nature of the disease. Why was Otto Otto
Warburg thrown under the bus?
What was wrong with him?
I looked at that and then I did research
myself over and over again coming back
to that the fact that Otto Warburg's
idea was absolutely correct. And then
what we did is we went back and we
showed where Otto Warburg
at that time did not have all of the
information that we now have. We were
able to go back and show where show
exactly where he made errors in his
calculations and his assumption, but he
was absolutely correct on what caused
cancer. And it's the disruption of
respiration within the cell. I showed
and others that the ROS
produced reactive oxygen radical oxygen
species that are carcinogenic and
mutagenic. So, all of the stuff that is
majorly thought to be genetic is
actually it's there. It's not that we
don't have mutations.
The problem is their effects. They're
not the cause.
So,
once you realize that cancer cells
cannot live without fermentation
metabolism, in other words, they can
live without oxygen.
Okay, they're the only few cells that
live without oxygen. The rest of us are
all dependent on oxygen. So, when you
say what are how are these cells living
without oxygen? They're using ancient
fermentation pathways. What's Okay, then
we know Okay, okay, then what do you
need to drive an ancient fermentation
pathway? You need two fuels only. We We
showed the sugar glucose and the amino
acid glutamine. We interrogated the
cells. We went through every kind of a
food that they could eat and we can't
find anything other than these two
fuels. And then when we test that on
preclinical systems, we kill the cancer.
I mean, it's not perfect yet, but we
have enough humans, dogs, and mice
to say that we can manage this disease
quite effectively by targeting the
fermentation metabolism and
transitioning the whole body over to a
fuel, ketones and fatty acids, that the
tumor cells can't use for energy. And
this puts the this puts the kibosh on
these tumor cells and you don't have to
use radiation, chemo, or any of these
other kinds of things. If you do it the
right One of the the main problems when
it's obvious to the person, the average
man and woman on the street, that we're
not winning this war on cancer. It's
obvious and the danger
is that when any big organization that's
supposed to know
is not doing a good job, what it what it
causes to happen is conspiracy theories.
And Gina Gina says they do not want to
heal cancer. This is a billion-dollar
industry. I've heard conspiracy theories
that they've got the cure for cancer,
it's locked away, they've got the
they're never going to release it. And
all that I I know that's not true. I
know that's not true. But that's what it
that's what happens to just normal
people on the street when they see, "Oh,
these guys are so intelligent and look
at all these drug ads on television, but
yet more and more of my friends are
getting cancer." That's the kind of
atmosphere that breeds conspiracy
theories. And I
we have a lot of healthcare providers
that watch my channel and I want you
guys to if you're a healthcare provider,
you need to understand that. When you
act like you know exactly and you this
is the way and there's I can't be wrong
and yet it's obvious by looking, "Oh, my
aunt has cancer. My sister has cancer.
My next-door neighbor has cancer." You
obviously don't know what you're talking
about and it spurs these kind of
conspiracy theories. No, I agree that
you would think a person who wouldn't
know would think that would be the case.
Because I've seen many people tell me,
"Oh, it's suppressed." Well, I'm talking
I'm telling you exactly what it is. Yes.
You're not You're not suppressing it.
The federal government isn't suppressing
it. The The pharmaceutical companies
aren't suppressing what I'm saying.
They're just simply ignoring it.
I mean, so so it's not like there's no
conspiracy here.
What it is is a lack of knowledge,
a disregard in wanting to know.
Everybody is seems to be very very
comfortable in their niche.
This what I'm saying comes along and it
causes a great deal of discomfort.
Because people are now going to have to
put perhaps do something different. So,
you have to realize that the NIH grants
and all the the funding and all this
kind of stuff is continuing to do
research on something
approaches that are not core to the
problem that we're that we're dealing
with. And therefore, it becomes very
uncomfortable
to try to
change the momentum
of the ship. You all you have to do is
go back in history and look at other
situations like what we're confronted
with today with cancer.
I I look at the the the geocentric
versus the heliocentric
explanation for the
movement of of celestial bodies.
You know, for decades and decades, the
Catholic Church held, yes, that the
earth was the center of the solar
system. Giordano
Bruno, the Italian scientist, was burned
at the stake,
killed, he became a martyr of science by
by telling the church that they they
might be wrong.
It was
Copernicus released his statement about
the
the heliocentric theory that the sun was
the center of the solar system on his
deathbed because he didn't want the
wrath of the church to eviscerate him.
Galileo was house arrested for his life
for saying that Copernicus was correct.
And then Kepler came along and said the
planet movements are completely
explained
by Copernicus and Galileo. Eventually,
the church said, "Yeah, maybe you guys
are right."
But it took a long time because you
challenged the authority of the central
dictate at that time. The church was the
center of knowledge and and and
discipline for for the sciences. So, and
same with
Louis Pasteur. He was eviscerated by the
French medical aristocracy for claiming
that germs, rather than bad air,
was responsible for disease. So, I'm
coming along and I'm telling you that
cancer is a mitochondrial metabolic
disease. It's not a genetic disease. And
I consider this just as important as the
shift from the heliocentric to the
geocentric to the heliocentric because
we have 1,600 people a day dying from
this misunderstanding or the failure to
address the situation. I consider this
even more important because whether you
believe the earth or the sun were the
center, it wasn't killing 1,600 people a
day for your disbelief. Maybe just
Giordano Bruno, but but not all these
poor folks
that are dying needlessly are suffering
horrendous. We don't have to have this.
You know, it doesn't have to be this
way. And what I'm saying doesn't require
a genius to figure out how I'm going to
cut calories, stop eating highly
processed carbohydrates, and transition
my body over to ketosis. You don't need
a degree and advanced engineering from
MIT to know about this. So, the change
is going to have to come from the people
themselves. If they're the ones that
want to do better, they have to put the
pressure on their politicians, on the
medical schools, and things like this.
Because they're not going to change
unless the customer makes the demand to
change. I totally agree with that. Now,
you you you brought up glucose and
glutamine earlier. Let's talk about
this. I made a a video on this channel a
few years back
titled Cancer
Cancer Love Sugar.
And and I talked about how we we attach
sugar to the molecule in a PET scan.
That's how we find cancer because the
cancer is ravenous for sugar. It'll take
it up quicker than any other human
tissue, and that's why cancer glows on
the PET scan. That's how we find it is
by using sugar for it to to seek out the
sugar. So, does cancer love sugar? And
if so, what what is the immediate
implication for the average person who
would rather not get cancer?
Yeah, well, I think when we say sugar uh
the cane sugar is uh uh one part glucose
and one part fructose. And it's the
fructose that actually accentuates the
sweetness.
Um it's the glucose that the tumor cell
loves. So, when you eat sugar, it gets
broken down and the glucose immediately
goes into your bloodstream and goes
right to the the tumor cell. The the two
Here's the situation.
The tumor cell is locked into a growth a
disregulated growth, and that's what the
definition of cancer is. People say,
"What is cancer?" It's simply cell
division out of control. Not not
complicated. Cells can't stop growing.
Okay, in order to grow, you need two
things. You need energy, and you need
raw materials. You need You need
something to build new cancer cells. So,
the carbon of the glucose Glucose comes
and the the cancer cell is garnished
with all these transporters for glucose.
So, the glucose comes pouring into the
cell. And the glucose carbons are
metabolized to a a a smaller
three-carbon molecule called pyruvate.
Now, in the normal cell, we all take in
glucose in our normal cells, and it goes
into our mitochondria uh as pyruvate,
fully oxidized
uh in our mitochondria. We breathe
oxygen, and we generate tremendous
energy through the process of oxidative
phosphorylation. We exhale carbon. Well,
a lot of the carbon that comes out as
CO2 was the carbons from the foods that
we ate. Okay? So, so we're eating food
uh and a lot of it comes out and the
water. So, the waste products of normal
metabolism are simply CO2 and water.
Um the waste products of cancer cells
are uh lactic acid and succinic acid and
glutamic acid. They're dumping out
acids. Uh they're not dumping out CO2
and water. They're dumping out acids.
Why is that? Why would the cancer cell
dump out acid? Okay? Cuz it might it
makes the microenvironment acidifies. It
the When you acidify the cancer
microenvironment, no chemotherapies,
radiation therapies, so it becomes much
more difficult to kill them. So, so
they're they're dumping out the acid
because they can't respire these
molecules using oxidative
phosphorylation. The mitochondria is
broken.
So, but the mitochondria
can also generate energy through this
ancient pathway of fermentation using
glutamine. It's an amino acid. And that
glutamine generates nitrogen for making
new DNA and RNA and protein. It makes
ATP for for for energy. Without energy,
nothing can grow. So, the glucose is
coming in in one pathway. The glutamine
is coming in on a on another pathway,
and these two pathways are powerfully
synergistic with each other. So, the
carbons from glucose are used to also
make DNA, also protect the cancer cell
against reactive oxygen species, but
also allow the cancer to make proteins
and lipids. So, you get the nitrogen
from glutamine, you get the energy from
the from the two pathways, and the
cancer cell is growing unregulated.
Continues to grow. So, the only way to
really effectively shut down this whole
system is you have to take away the two
fuels that these cells are absolutely
dependent upon and transition the body
over to a fuel that the tances cancer
cells cannot use, which is a ketone body
or fatty acid. Why? Because you need a
good mitochondria to burn fatty acids
and ketone bodies. The mitochondria of
the cancer cell can't do that. How is
This is not complicated.
This is not not complicated. I find that
the guy on the street
can understand this better than the guy
running the National Cancer Institute.
Can you believe this? I mean, it's just
like I find it astonishing. And you
know, that's that's my point. That's
where the conspiracy theories come from
because when you say something like you
just said, that's a revolutionary
statement. That is that is inflammatory
as all get out.
How can you even say that the people at
Sloan Kettering that or the Cancer
Institute How do they not know How can
How is that even possible that they
don't know that?
Yeah, I think a lot of them do. Okay? I
mean, a lot of them do. But then they'll
they'll they'll sidestep the situation
by saying, "Oh, yeah, we all know cancer
cells have a screwed-up metabolism, but
it's gene-driven.
It's under the gene control." No, it's
not. Damn, I published a paper showing
that it can't be. So, that's kind of a
protective. And the guy on the street
doesn't know what the What does he know?
He's not reading the papers like I'm
reading the papers every day, you know,
looking at this. So, it's a it's a
sidestep. Yeah, oh, we all know cancer's
metabolic. No, you're going to
Everybody, go to the NCI. Oh, yeah,
cancer's metabolic, but gene-driven.
No, no, no, no. Not gene-driven. It's
mitochondrial-driven. When someone's
been diagnosed When someone's been
diagnosed with cancer and they go to
their oncologist, and the oncologist
says, "Okay, we're going to set you up
for chemo and radiation." And then after
every chemo treatment every radiation
treatment, they give them a glass of OJ,
and they give them some cookies, some
snacks, some crackers. They're actually
not doing their patient any favors.
No. It's It's Well, that that that that
speaks to the fact that they are they
lack knowledge.
Okay? If you were understood the biology
of the disease you were treating, you
would never ever do something like that.
Okay? So, if a oncologist says, "Oh,
don't worry about Eat anything you want
while you're undergoing these
treatments." That person
lacks knowledge.
That person should not be in the
position they're in when they say
something stupid like that. I like this
guy more every every sentence I like him
more and more. So, you
Roxanne makes a great point. In in
modern times, we don't burn people at
the stake or eviscerate them anymore. We
just destroy their career if they say
something revolutionary like you're
saying.
Uh
What about
enough to not worry about that.
Excellent, and I'm glad. I love it when
somebody stops caring about their career
and starts caring about, "Hey, let's
just help men and women."
Well, you you know, a very funny thing,
Ken.
Uh I get a lot of positive feedback from
physicians that have retired.
But not as many with the guys that are
working on the day-to-day. You know,
they say, "I know you're right, 100%
right, but man, when I was work, I
couldn't say anything about it." But but
uh So, that tells us, you know,
uh I think the system
uh prevents people from uh stepping uh
stepping off the path. Um they could
lose their license. And there's a lot of
reasons for this. This is not just one
reason. I mean, I see I train so many
kids to go to medical schools,
uh and they don't get any information on
diet therapy. as a medical tool. They're
just simply not trained.
And and they don't they never heard it
before. And then all of a sudden uh
patients come in off the street and tell
the doctor, "I I think I I should be on
a order fasting for some time before I
do this What are you talking about? You
know, what do you know? You didn't go to
medical school. I'm the one who paid all
that money to go to medical school. I
know what I'm talking about." And a lot
of times they do. I mean, if you're
going in for a hip replacement, knee
replacement, or something like that,
those folks know what they're doing.
You know, but when it comes to cancer,
it's a totally different ballgame.
Uh most of those poor folks are clueless
as to the hurry biology. And the guys at
the NIH and big hospitals,
uh they're all running trials on drugs
that are all based on the somatic
mutation theory of cancer. And if the
somatic mutation theory of cancer is not
correct, then the stuff they're giving
you is not ultimately going to be the
solution to the problem. I totally
agree.
You got 1,600 people a day dying every
day in the country from a lack of
knowledge and a and a resistance to
change the system.
Now, one thing that cancer researchers,
oncologists, and almost everybody in the
healthcare field knows for a fact, Dr.
Seyfried, is that red meat
and processed meat cause cancer or at
least increase your risk of cancer.
Uh has that pathway has that been really
mapped out so that we know that
conclusively red meat causes cancer.
What do you think about that?
I mean, it's absurd. We evolved
tell us from your learned perspective,
how is that And why If it is
why in the hell are they
saying this? Because Well, first of all,
we evolved in the Paleolithic times
to kill and eat animals.
If we didn't go out and kill and eat
animals, we would not today exist as a
species.
No one was growing corn, wheat, or any
of that type. I mean, you were
hunter-gatherers.
The uh Plains Indians would follow the
buffaloes around. These are the
aboriginal kinds of people. You would
kill whatever Africans, bush meat, you
name it. Whatever walked or crawled, our
species was able to eat. Would we eat a
vegetable if we had if we if we were a
ripe fruit? Of course. We're omnivorous.
We can eat anything.
Um if you eat meat every day that is
hormonally prepared, not natural, uh you
could put yourself at risk
uh for some some kinds of problems.
Oftentimes, people aren't sitting down
and eating 4 lb of meat. They got a big
potato, a bowl of rice, and some bread
with butter on it right next to it,
followed off by something else. So, you
have a high-fat, high-carbohydrate diet.
That's not good. Our ancestors had very
little opportunity for highly processed
carbo and zero ultra-processed carbo
foods didn't exist. And Albert
Schweitzer, the great humanitarian
physician, found that in the African
tribes, there was no cancer. They never
found cancer. The Eskimos, they said,
"Oh, Eskimos are completely resis-
Eskimos never get cancer." So, all of
the aboriginal tribes of our ancestors,
don't forget, they're all our ancestors,
they had no cancer. So, where the hell
did all this cancer come from? Eating
red meat? No, it didn't come from eating
red meat. It came from eating highly
processed carbohydrates. That's where
That's the origin of cancer. And what
does that do? It elevates blood sugar.
It damages oxidative phosphorylation.
The obesity epidemic is evolution in
action.
What you're seeing is that our genes are
so
our our genetics is so tuned to store
energy. If we weren't able to store
energy in the form of fat, we would have
never We'd have been wiped out on the
first ice ages and things. Famines would
have wiped us out. We're supremely
geared to store energy. Now, all of a
sudden, we find ourselves in a totally
different environment eating highly
processed carbs, getting fatter and
fatter, more and more cancer, dementia,
cardiovascular disease. It's a It's a
epidemic of chronic diseases because of
our diet and lifestyle.
So, so clearly, it's diet and lifestyle
that are doing this, right? And we're
targeting cancer cells by depriving them
of their fermentable fuels, which are
made abundant by our diet and lifestyle.
Absolutely. So, I mean, people have to
understand this.
Now, you go ahead, doctor.
No, I just said. I mean, if they don't
understand
And
again, people always say about
prevention.
Nobody cares about prevention. Because
we have an obesity epidemic. If If
everybody cared about prevention, you
wouldn't find any fat people around. I
mean, the
like our ancestors, you think we had
300-lb guys walking around in the
Paleolithic period? No. They're all
short and fit and and and and and tough.
You know, they didn't have their body
weights, the sizes, and things that we
have today. Absolutely. And And what Dr.
Seyfried is saying is exactly correct.
I've I've made it my mission over the
last several years to really dig into
the archaeology literature and the
anthropology literature and even the
paleoanthropological literature. And
before 200 years ago, now, maybe not
even that long in some cultures, cancer
was just literally unheard of. There
would be one person in the village that
got cancer, and that was it. And And And
when we look at the fossil evidence,
there's just no indication that cancer
was anywhere nearly as ubiquitous almost
these days. And so, yeah, he's exactly
right. There would There just
thing is cancer. And people that looked
at kind of sequestered cultures like the
Inuit and like the the the small tribes
scattered around South America, Africa,
Australia that were eating an aboriginal
diet that was as much meat as they could
possibly get their hands on. And then,
they would fill it in with tubers and
nuts and berries and other things.
Cancer was just nonexistent. And so, it
has to be something in the modern
society.
Now, you say a very interesting thing,
and this is going to get very nerdy very
quick. You say that cancer progression
is Lamarckian, not Darwinian. And And
I've I've read enough
animal biology and evolutionary biology
to know what you mean by that, but I
want you to explain to the to the
average person, what do you mean by such
a statement? Yeah, it's it's a very
interesting from from Lamarck, who
preceded Darwin in in
Lamarck was of the opinion that things
changed. They were not rock written in
granite. Everybody all animal everything
here Jack exactly as they were. He said
there was opportunities for change.
An evolution. But he he he attributed to
your environment, you acquire certain
things in the course of your life.
And those things are then passed on to
the next generation. And he felt
that that had some level
of
credibility. You know, the blacksmith's
arms were big banging this and the sun
did that. But you It was a cultural
thing that also could contribute to that
to that as well. But we're really now
realizing with these kind of epigenetic
things that are happening in one
generation can in fact modify things in
the second generation. Even though
Lamarck was also thrown under the bus
in light of the Darwinian evolution. But
what I said in cancer why how I was able
to integrate
a Lamarckian view was that
when we when cancer initiates in the
first cell or group of cells in a
particular tissue in a particular organ,
it's usually the result of a chronic
irritation of something that would
provoke an inflammatory situation
damaging the oxidative phosphorylation
capacity
in in the cell.
Never enough to kill the cell outright,
but enough to injure that cell.
Enough to elicit a slow
compensatory
fermentation. Because if I damage the ox
phos too critically
I kill the cell. But if the cell has the
capacity to slowly upregulate a
fermentation, it gains the ability to
survive under lower and lower oxygen,
eliciting a growth
a cell division, if you will.
At first, the cell division is is very
very slow.
The organelle that controls the cell
cycle is in fact the mitochondrion. The
mitochondrion in the cell controls the
cell cycle.
That the differentiated state of the
cell in our liver or kidneys, wherever
it is, we have cells that perform a a a
vital function day in and day out.
They're not dividing. Only they would
divide if they had to be replaced, and
it's a very regulated division
controlled by the energy of the cell,
which is the mitochondrion. So, if we
have cells that the mitochondrion become
slightly injured,
these cells then
start to lose
the cell starts to deviate from its
differentiated
resting state. And each division that
goes by, if the chronic irritation is
not removed and persists, the cell
slowly do a little bit a little bit more
division, slower and slower eventually.
So, what happens is that when the cell
divides, that damaged mitochondrion is
passed on to the daughter cells in the
mitotic activity. So, each cell division
passes on to some degree some damage in
that mitochondrion. It's acquired. As
the cell becomes more and more
fermentative the microenvironment
becomes a little bit more acidic. And
what happens is the mitochondrion become
more and more damaged from the acidity
in the microenvironment, and they pass
on damage from one generation to the
next. It's an acquired damage in each
division that happens.
Also at the same time, those reactive
oxygen species coming from the
acidification also cause mutations in
the nucleus. So, the nucleus is gaining
mutations, and the mitochondria are
being passed on damaged. So, it's an
acquired
continuation of damaged mitochondria and
mutations in the nucleus, all of which
are building to a greater and greater
extent. So, by the time you look and see
your cancer identified on PET scan or
however you see it, you already have
millions of cells that are dysregulated
in their cell growth. You look You take
a tissue and you say, "Look at all the
mutations that you have. Now, we're
going to try to target your mutations
cuz you've accumulated these." But if
you look at the mitochondrion in those
cells, they're all blown out. They're
They're dysfunctional. Okay? So, how did
that happen? It happened through an
acquired
passing on of these damaged mitochondria
from one cell division to the other with
the damage accumulating over time,
leading to what eventually becomes known
as a malignancy.
So, the cells are no longer in their
They can't be growth regulated because
the very organelle that regulates their
growth is dysfunctional.
So, the controlling system of the cell,
the cell has lost its control, and now
it's growing out of control. And the
more it grows out of control, the more
the mitochondria become damaged, but the
more they begin to ferment glutamine.
So, it's an interesting situation. So,
once you understand the beginning, the
progress, and what you get eventually
see, and why and how, you know how to
stop this.
You know how to kill it kill it in its
tracks. So, let's talk about the
glutamine, doctor. You mentioned
glutamine earlier. That's an amino acid.
And
immediately, a lot of people will say,
"Oh, amino acid, that's protein, so we
need to eat a low-protein diet. We need
to avoid meat because it's got amino
acids in it." Is the glutamine that
you're talking about, is it endogenous
glutamine or exogenous? Is it coming
from the diet? Is the body making it?
Talk to teach us about the glutamine.
Yeah, glutamine, it's called a
nonessential amino acid, okay? But it's
absolutely essential for a lot of
things. It's essential for the tumor.
It's essential for our immune system.
It's essential for our gut. The reason
why it's not essential because we can
make it from glucose. So, you can make
glucose to glutamate that can eventually
make glutamine. So, there are some amino
acids that are absolutely diet related.
You have to have them in the diet.
Whereas other amino acids can be created
within our body.
Glutamine is an interesting amino acid.
It's the most abundant in amino acid in
our bloodstream. So, a glutamine
dominates all the other amino acids. I
mean, you're you're up at about 3 or 4
millimolar in the blood. So, it's there
for so many reasons because it feeds our
immune system. When we get an infection,
our macrophage, the T cells and B cells
are all heavily dependent our immune
system is heavily dependent on
glutamine. So, you can't just get rid of
glutamine. Our gut our
our gut health is dependent on
glutamine. The urea cycle is dependent
on glutamine. So, glutamine is
everywhere. There's no diet that you can
use to start target glutamine. If you
are burned if a patient is burned
severely, uh they get glutamine
injections. You give
glutamine injection to a burn patient
because you need to the immune system
cast to keep out the bacteria.
Bacteria are prevented from entering on
our skin. If our skin is burned,
staff, strep, all this stuff enters in
our body. Our macrophage our immune
system has to fight these bacteria.
Otherwise, the patient's going to die
from infection. So, you give high dose
glutamine because the amount of
glutamine in our bloodstream is not
enough to satiate the demand for
glutamine for our immune system. So, you
give high dose glutamine to the burn
patient. Some sick people that have
you got to have your immune fighting.
So, so we need glutamine. But the tumor
cell needs the glutamine as well. So,
you have to use this press pulse concept
that I I developed where we we choke off
their glucose because our bodies don't
need glucose. We can burn fatty acids
and ketones to replace the glucose.
Okay, yeah, the press pulse concept. So,
what we do is we pulse we target
glutamine availability with drugs for a
short period of time. Okay. So, what's
going to happen? Here's what's happened.
The tumor cell, if you can choke off his
glucose with the ketogenic diet or or
fasting or lower the blood sugar in a
variety of of different natural ways, uh
uh you come in with a drug
and you hit that glutamine availability
uh just for a short period of time. You
come in with a one singular dose at one
time. It's called doses timing and
scheduling. You slaughter a whole
buttload of these tumor cells. But then
you got to pull that drug back because
if you keep it on, you're going to
paralyze your very immune system that's
needed to remove the corpses.
If you kill a whole bunch of tumor cells
in a particular organ at single time,
and then you don't come in to pick up
the corpses, you could run the
internal inflammation. You could you
could get all kinds of other issues that
are going to stand in the way of the
therapy. So, you come back off on the
glutamine. Let the immune system because
the immune system isn't killed by the
glutamine targeting drug. It's simply
paralyzed. It doesn't kill them, but
just makes them ineffective in picking
up the corpses. So, you have to pull the
drug back. Hold on the Hold on It's It's
unbelievable. I mean, this is really
really nice stuff when you really know
how to work with it. And you let the
immune system pick up the dead bodies.
And of course, some of those cancer
cells will grow just a little bit. But
as soon as they pull it back and hit
them again with the glutamine targeting.
And you don't do so much. It's not
Patients don't have to lose their hair.
They don't have to lose all this stuff.
So, what we do like you can see here on
the diagram. The guy comes into the
clinic. Not only does he have cancer, he
usually has all kinds of other maladies,
type 2 diabetes, parasite infections,
imbalances, metabolic imbalances. So, we
have to bring that person back into some
normalcy of metabolic homeostasis. We
got to get that guy back in some level
of shape. And we start hitting them with
ketogenic restricted diets, zero carb
diets, water only fasting, this kind of
stuff. Um we brought blood blood sugar
goes down, ketones go up. The guy starts
to feel a little bit better. Then we
come in with the pulsing. So, and we
also use um
stress management, you know, music
People are all stressed out with cancer.
So, their blood sugar is high because of
the cortisol. So, you have to be
careful.
Excuse me.
I'm going to drink some water.
I got so excited about this I can't
talk. I love it. I love it. So, so what
happens then? We bring this guy to a
managed state.
It's not so critical now. So, how do you
feel? I feel pretty good. You know, the
guy says, "Hey, I'm feeling all right.
You know, I'm a little hungry maybe, but
my energy is coming back. I don't feel
so bad." And then we strategically
uh target slowly by doses timing and
scheduling. We can bring that guy Now,
some of these people that we work with,
they stay in the yellow zone for long
periods of time.
Uh which means that their cancer is not
resolved. It's just put into a dormant
state. Their quality of life is pretty
good, but they always got the angel of
death looking over their shoulder. So,
they say, "Whoa, jeez, you know, I got
to be careful about this. I you know,
every time I do a PET scan or I see
something there. But I feel good. You
know, I'm not I'm not crippled. My
quality of life is pretty good." And
they could stay in that in that
semi-managed zone for long periods of
time. Uh it's the yellow it's the green
zone, which is resolution.
That's the point where this guy's been
going for so long. The only know way
we can know resolution is if someone at
at say 45 years old, 50 years of age has
a malignant cancer we put it under
metabolic control uh never knowing
whether he's fully resolved
resolved or not. He dies at 98 from old
age. Never The cancer never came back.
Okay, he was cured.
But other than that, you would never
know. So, it takes a minute to figure
that out.
Yeah, I mean, do you want to live longer
with a higher quality of life?
Uh that's what you have to ask people
have to ask themselves. Now, is this a
100% effective? No.
It's Is it better than any of the
current therapies? I would say yes.
Okay? You're not going to lose hair.
You're You're not going to bleed from
all orifices of your body. I mean, I I
don't know anybody who had
hyperprogressive disease from ketogenic
metabolic therapy. I know a lot of
people who've died real quick from
immunotherapies with hyperprogressive
disease where the drug kills you before
the tumor can. And if you're right about
if you're right about the the key the
ketosis
and the dropping the sugar out,
if you're right about the science behind
that that it's going to be virtually
impossible for
the cancer to to to to to ultimately be
victorious. Now, this is an interesting
question.
whoa, whoa, wait, wait, wait. Go ahead.
Yes, sir. Go ahead. Not always because
some people fall they they say, "Oh, I'm
We That was happened to our first GBM
patient. She was under complete control
with metabolic therapy and we did the
scans on her brain.
Complete gone. You know, everything. We
couldn't see anywhere with a CAT scan.
But or MRI, you couldn't see anything.
But that doesn't mean the cancer cells
weren't there. As soon as she got off
metabolic therapy, she went out eating
eating high carbohydrate foods, it came
roaring back. So, and she passed away
from taking Avastin, which should be
outlawed. Anybody gives Avastin
is malpractice. I don't care what
anybody says.
I've seen enough of that to be to be
know that doesn't work. It can actually
hurt you in so many ways. And yet they
give it to these poor folks. And I've
got a question coming up about the
cancer treatment medications. But Jane
says she they she was diagnosed having
the BRCA1 gene. And you as you know,
many women will have a preemptive
mastectomy. They will have their breasts
removed. Yeah. Thinking that that's
necessary to prevent breast cancer
because they've got this gene that
guarantees that they're going to have
breast cancer. Talk to us about this. If
someone
has a family history like oh, mom had
breast cancer and they checked her
genetics. She's got the BRCA1. I've got
it. Should I have a mastectomy?
Yeah, great question because that's um a
secondary cause of cancer, not the
primary cause.
Okay,
there's a BRAC BRAC1 is is penetrant.
That means if you have the gene, what is
the probability that you're going to get
cancer from the gene? It's about 55,
60%. Sometimes 45 That means there's 40
to 60 40 to 50% of the women that have
the mutation never get cancer.
So,
a primary cause is when you have the
when you have the defect and that defect
is always associated with neoplasia.
What is always associated with neoplasia
is mitochondrial dysfunction, oxidative
phosphorylation dysfunction. Now, what's
interesting
is that the women who have BRAC1
who get cancer, their that BRAC1 in some
way has damaged their that oxidative
phosphorylation capacity. So, the
linkage is BRAC1 ox phos deficiency
cancer. But 50% of women have this BRAC1
that never get ox phos deficiency.
We don't know if that is that could be
called epigenetic effect. There's
another gene that represses the BRAC1.
Or there's something in the environment
that doesn't allow BRAC1 to damage the
oxidative phosphorylation. So, it's a
it's a risk factor.
Uh BRAC1 is considered a risk factor.
Like if I'm if you're exposed to
tetrahydrochloride
or a chemical in the it is a risk
factor. Uh people constantly exposed to
chemical carcinogens
uh
increase their risk of getting cancer
from exposure to the carcinogen. Does
everybody exposed to the carcinogen
develop cancer? No. Uh it's a risk
factor. Uh BRAC1 is a risk factor, but
it's not 100% penetrant. The gene that's
100 not The closest uh the highest level
of penetrance is the Li-Fraumeni uh
disease. It's a a PD It's a
P53 mutation that affects cytochrome c
oxidase 2 in the mitochondria, I
believe. And it disrupts oxidative
phosphorylation. It's about 85%
penetrant. So, only 15% of people that
have the mutation don't develop cancer.
But again, it's a risk factor, a very
high risk factor. BRCA1 is a medium risk
factor. Now, what people can do what
people do like Angelina Jolie and and
some others, the actress there, they had
their breasts and ovary removed.
Those are the organs that are most
likely to develop a cancer if BRCA1
becomes penetrant and damages oxidative
phosphorylation.
Had Angelina Jolie done metabolic
therapy as a as a as a prophylactic and
not had her breasts and ovaries removed,
we don't know.
The other thing too is having breasts
and ovaries removed doesn't doesn't mean
that that BRCA1 will not be expressed in
some other tissue at some later point in
life. You just don't know. So, I think
people, at least if you know it's a
secondary risk factor and not a primary
risk factor, then what can you do to
prevent to reduce the probability that
the BRCA1
will cause cancer?
And
you can you can lower your risk by
knowing what you should do in a
prevention way. I mean, we've looked
into this in depth. We have not found
any
inherited mutation that's 100%
penetrant. As I said, Li-Fraumeni is the
is the best. Then they have these others
that are about 5 or 10% penetrant. So,
you have a woman in in these shoes.
She finds out she's got the BRCA1 gene.
If she said, "No, doctor, I don't want a
preemptive mastectomy and and
oophorectomy. I would rather just adopt
and stick to a therapeutic ketogenic
diet that's going to keep me in ketosis
for the rest of my life." Would that be
a rational decision on that woman's
part? Well, you can ask my good friend
Dominic D'Agostino. He's always in
ketosis. He's not a woman, but if the
fact that he's all his body is always If
Dominic gets cancer, man, I'm throwing
the towel in. Right.
That guy That guy is like in ketosis all
the time. He eats only the healthiest
stuff all the time. He's always got low
blood sugar, elevated ketones. I mean I
mean
he is in that kind of a zone.
Now, a lot of people It's very hard,
let's be honest, to be in that zone in
today's day
world. I mean, every time you turn
around, there's something that's going
to throw you out of that zone. I mean,
the smell of a freshly cooked pizza, a
donut coming out of the oven, a big loaf
of bread.
Man, I mean,
you say, "Oh man, I If I eat that
bread." Well, you can take a bite as
long as you can get back. That's why we
built the glucose-ketone index
calculator.
It's a tool to allow people to know
whether or not they're in ketosis. And
Dom is always like in the the low I
think he's below 10, 5, 2 like this. And
I know we he and I had a contest one
time. I had one student that was really
really good on water only fasting. And
women seem to get lower GKIs than men.
They have better They can mobilize fat
out of their bodies easier than men, I
think. I don't know what it is. But
anyway, they always they always seem to
So, I had this one young lady and she
she got a
GKI of like
I think it was like 34,
which was a point point 34, lower than
one, which is really, you know, really
point 34. So, you're have higher ketones
than higher glucose.
So, I I took a picture of it and I sent
it to Dominic. I said, "Dom, look at
what one of my students can do." He said
he writes back is a very impressive. So,
next week I get a
I get an email from Dom with the the the
glucose-ketone meter and he said, "Beat
that." So, what what what Dom did Listen
to what Dom did. He knew that he was Now
he was being challenged. So, he went 4
days water only fasting
and then drank his he drank he makes
ketones. He has a company that makes
ketones. So, he drank this ketone
solution. And he and he brought his
blood sugars down to 25 mg per
deciliter, which most clinicians would
say, "Oh, you should be dead."
He has ketone levels were up around 6 or
7 millimolar. And his GKI values were
like
a point 18 or something. And I'm saying,
"Oh my god." He said, "Beat that."
And he was fine. Well, I have a paper
here,
which is really quite interesting. You
don't have this one. This is an
interesting paper by Drenick's group.
So, what Drenick did
Show that paper one more time, doctor.
It's a paper published by
Ernst Drenick.
Can you see it there?
Oh, yeah, you can you see it there, Ken?
I don't know where you went. Let's see.
Anyway, Our viewers are funny. They love
to look up look stuff up and actually
read papers. Yeah, well, have them read
the Drenick paper. Nothing more
exciting. So, what Drenick did is he
took these
morbidly obese folks, nine obese
subjects, and they they all had a high
high blood
So, he he fasted them for 21 day. I
think it was 21 days. Water only fasting
21 days. And of course, their blood
sugar go down and their ketones go up.
And then he gives them a high dose shot
of insulin.
He brings their blood sugar down. It
says right here
9 mg per per deciliter.
Deciliter
0.5 millimolar.
That should kill everybody. None of
these guys perfectly cognitive
cognitively okay. Why? Because the brain
was burning ketones now. Ketones replace
glucose. So, you can push those glucose
People say, "Oh, you can't bring the
glucose levels down." Why don't you read
Drenick?
He did it in humans. Yeah, you
definitely can do that and indeed many
of our followers,
my wife Niesha included, when they're in
deep ketosis, they'll very often see a
blood glucose of 45. And they're like,
"But I felt completely fine and normal."
And and I'm like, "Yeah, in the setting
of ketosis,
Yeah. that's not that's not dangerous."
Now, here's another great question.
This is Debbie. She was diagnosed with
metastatic breast cancer and I don't
know exactly what therapy she had, but
she's now adopted a keto war diet, which
is by definition less than 10 total
grams of carbohydrates a day. And she's
also taking several of the medications
that's recommended by mainstream medical
practice.
Is her dietary intervention is that a
smart move? And obviously, none of this
is medical advice. We're we might be
doctors, but we're not your doctor.
Yeah. What do you think about her
adopting a keto war diet super low in
carbohydrates? She's going to be in
ketosis the majority of each and every
day.
And then what about all these
medications? Any other names pop out
that you have any comments on? Well,
first of all, I don't know what her GKI
value is. Right. I mean, we got to know
what her GKI is. So, so her
glucose-ketone index. Like I was just
talking about Dom and my students and
things. We're all measuring the GKI. So,
you could be eating a carb a diet that
has very low in carbohydrates. But what
is your GKI? Is is cuz a lot of these
drugs that that um you take
are are brutal. They can raise blood
sugar internally. You
gluconeogenesis could go through the
roof as the result of this, throwing you
out of a good GKI. I I don't know. So,
what we do, our our plan for cancer
management is we first bring the patient
back
into a state of metabolic homeostasis,
metabolic homeostasis, get the GKI at
2.0 or below,
and then we hit them with
diet glutamine targeting drugs. Now, the
drug that I think works best is
6-diazo-5-oxo-L-norleucine,
DON, D O N,
Delta Oscar November,
6-diazo-5-oxo-L-norleucine.
Because there's no diet that will lower
your glu- Well, actually, that's not
completely true. George Cahill of the
great
Joslin Diabetes Center found that a
14- to 18-day water only fasting
will lower your blood glutamine.
But, you know, Dom can do it much
better.
I don't know why we're not allowed to
use that. You should be able to get it
on right to try. Johns Hopkins is
building a variant of this drug. But the
drug works best when glucose is reduced.
And when the drug when the drug is
administered in a ketogenic diet, that
just knocks the crap out of these tumor
cells without any toxicity. So, why are
we not doing that? I can't speak to
these other drugs that people are
taking. I don't know what they do. All I
know is if I had cancer, I would never
take any of that stuff. That's my
personal opinion. Got you. You know, I
would never
I don't take anything poison. I don't
take any drugs at all. Maybe some wine
and beer. But but other than that, I I
don't take any drugs.
Now, Roxana's got a great question. What
would you consider the the minimal
reading for ketosis to either prevent or
if somebody's been diagnosed with
cancer, what would you love to see their
ketone readings
on a serum ketone level to know that
yes, you're doing a good job at
protecting yourself from either getting
cancer or from metastasis?
Well, let's talk about prevention first
because it's
story. You you have you have prevention.
What do you
So, look at
Ken, just like you said at the
beginning. What did our
No one was around
12,000 years ago to measure a
glucose-ketone index on our aboriginal
ancestors. But we do have
as you said, some of these aboriginal
peoples that are living on their own
lifestyles, if we can find them today
anywhere.
What's their What's their GKI values?
Because I'm sure they weren't they were
all on the low side because there wasn't
any carbohydrates in their diet. So, I
think and we know they they don't get
cancer. Eskimos never got They never got
cancer. They didn't get have cancer. So,
what was their GKI during that period of
time? They had no highly processed
carbohydrates in their food chain. It
was all natural meats,
berries, nuts, whatever they could
whatever they could find they would eat
it. So, that that would prevent
Obviously, those people never got
cancer. So, clearly they were prevented
from getting cancer. So, I don't know.
Um Now, as far as having cancer and then
trying to get into a
That's what our press pulse strategy is.
That works with the person that has
cancer. How can we bring their body back
into metabolic homeostasis? And as I
said, we the dog we did it with the dog
uh that we just published the paper uh
showing how that dog completely cancer
was completely eliminated from a
malignant mast cell tumor just by diet
changing the diet and calorie
restricting the natural diet. Just
blasted the tumor off the dog's face.
So, a lot of people are showing me
similar evidence. Yeah, I read the
paper. I It was a
a moving Twitter uh post that you made
the the before and after picture of the
dog's snout was just
amazing. Let me ask you this. You
brought up Dom D'Agostino and his
ketones. Do you think that in the in the
treatment of cancer that exogenous
ketones Mhm. play a meaningful role
versus the endogenous ketones that we
can all create ourselves just by eating
a very very low carbohydrate ketogenic
diet? Yeah, I think so. Um and that's
like it's it's like a supercharger to
something you're already you're already
doing yourself. Um my my concern and I
think you'll have to talk to Dom about
this
is you know, what are the best exogenous
ketones? Uh because there's a lot of
stuff on the market that's not right.
You know, everybody wants to jump into
this stuff uh trying to you know,
the salesman's kind of stuff
Some of the stuff is bogus. Um you
really should have no sugar at all or
sweeteners. You got to really reduce a
lot of this kind of stuff. Always
double-check your glucose ketone index
yourself. Use the KetoMojo meter uh that
you can buy on Amazon. Uh everybody
should have have one, I think. Um you
know, a lot of health health nuts are
all Guys are lifting weights and they're
running and doing all this stuff.
They're they're measuring their GKI a
lot. Now, I made it for the cancer
patients. I wasn't it making it for
CrossFit people. You know, but they're
using it to say, "Look how healthy I can
get when I have my my sugar low and my
ketones elevated." They get into this
new Paleolithic state of existence
and they feel like they're going to go
out and you know, wrestle down a a
buffalo. You know, something
I don't know. These guys are
Yeah, you know.
Can you Can you spell Drenick? Mitzi's
trying to look this paper up. Drenick
Drenick Here it Here it is again. What
it Can you Let me see how how I can get
it here. Can you see it there? Drenick.
Ernst
Ernst Drenick d r e n i c k
Uh Thank you. Perfect. Perfect.
And this is This was published in the
uh the Journal of Clinical
Investigation, which is a top medical
journal.
Excellent. Now, let's talk to the the
man and woman in the street, Dr.
Seyfried.
They've they've listened to our our
discussion
and they're like, "Okay, so what are the
the five simple things that I should do
if I would like to slash my risk of
developing cancer? And indeed, what can
I do for my family to decrease their
risk of cancer? What about my friends,
my my loved ones, my neighbor across the
street? What are the four or five or six
or seven just basic things that you need
to stop doing or start doing
that are going to have a tremendous
effect effect on lowering your risk of
developing cancer?"
Yeah, well I think um
since we know uh what causes cancer
uh we would try to avoid the the risk
factors that that cause cancer. And
uh I think the single singular biggest
thing is um
uh ultra-processed carbohydrates
in the diet.
Okay? Which is everywhere.
Um you know, I heard that from Ireland
you know, the Subway sandwiches, right?
Subway sandwiches They looked at the
Subway bread, the bread on the sandwich.
And the Irish deemed that it cannot be
called bread.
The level of sugar in the bread was so
high they had to call it a
confectionary. Yes. It's like putting
meat between two donuts. You know,
this stuff is going is going to kill
you. Now, not to say that if I eat a
Subway sandwich uh I'm going to die. No,
of course not. Um it's like how
frequently you do this and what does it
do uh to your basal metabolic rate? What
What does it do to your BMI? Your your
your your
your your size. Um What does it do to
your blood sugar levels?
Uh so so, you know, there was an
interesting paper published within the
last few months with the Mediterranean
diet where they looked at like 40,000
people over 10 years or whatever. And
they found that their
obesity cancer and dementia were
significantly reduced by a Mediterranean
diet.
It wasn't the Mediterranean diet. The
Mediterranean diet did not have highly
processed carbohydrates in it. It was
the absence of the things that cause all
these problems. So, if you can avoid
and exercise is extremely important.
You know, this is a
uh
and the problem The problem is this
these foods
are so tasty.
Uh don't Listen, I had a
It was last year I had a McDonald's
hamburger uh for the first time in like
3 years cuz the kids were upset they
needed some food. We had to get off the
highway. The only thing there was a
McDonald's. So, I said to my wife,
"Well, we'll get one of these things." I
hadn't had one in like 3 years. I said,
"I ate this McDonald's was so so damn
good I was trembling while I was eating
it." You know, it's not it's not like
they not They're making it so you can't
eat it. The best things that you like
are
and you know, not to say that you know,
a McDonald's hamburger is ever going to
kill you, of course not. But the problem
is it's the constant barrage on your
body of highly processed carbohydrate
foods clearly is the number one risk
factor for dementia uh cancer diabetes
uh cardiovascular disease. Almost all
the major chronic diseases are coming
from what we're eating.
Right? I mean, not hard. But it's it's
the eating the stuff that we love the
most. And it's also cheap relative to
healthy stuff.
So, you know, folks that may not have uh
a means and they're living hand to
mouth. I mean, this may be the only
nutrition they get. And they put
themselves at risk, unfortunately.
And they have all of these kinds of
problems. It's not So, it's really our
society, our Western civilization. The
evidence is so overwhelming. You know,
cancer comes because we're the ones
eating. And as I said, the
pharmaceutical company and the federal
government are not forcing us to eat
high carbohydrate foods.
That's true. They might do it They might
do a better job at letting us know the
hazards. They certainly let us know
about smoking. Right?
But um someone eating engorging
themselves on hamburgers is not putting
you sitting next to that person at risk
for getting diabetes. Where second-hand
smoke could, therefore the society went
into a big thing, cut down second-hand
smoke, we stopped smoking. We made it um
uh uh
you know, we put we we we made it
un
not right to sit and put someone else's
life at risk. Yes. Um however, when you
consider
burden on our health care industry
and the very lifeblood of this country
going into taking care of people
that have abused themselves
by eating all this stuff uh all that
billions and billions of dollars going
into cancer, diabetes, cardiovascular
disease. Think if we put that into
education, roads, the military, all
kinds of things that would benefit our
society. And yet we're throwing it into
people who
are no fault of their own
uh just driven to eat all this crazy
stuff. So, so it's a societal thing.
People just need to be aware of it. I'm
not telling people don't eat McDonald's
and donuts and Subway sandwiches and all
that. Just know that there is a risk in
doing that all the time and not
exercising. If you're not exercising,
you're sitting around on the computer,
you're going to get fat, you're going to
get demented, and you're going to get
diabetes, and you're going to die
earlier than the than other people who
don't do that.
Another thing in the modern diet that
there's just there was no none of it,
zero, is industrialized processed
vegetable seed oils, canola, soybean.
In your research and in your reading,
have you seen a connection with the
inflammation that I believe is caused by
the industrially processed vegetable
seed oils and rates of cancer? Yeah,
well I don't know enough about that to
speak to cuz I haven't done any studies
on seed oils. So, I I don't you know,
our job is to kill off cancer cells by
depriving them of their fuels. Um you
know, I'm not looking at the whether
eating seed oils gave you the cancer in
the first place. All I know is if
it's the highly processed carbohydrate
foods.
Uh maybe seed oils can make them worse.
I don't know. Uh but certainly it's not
going to be in my mind the number one
issue. Uh not to say that they're
they're healthy not if unhealthy. I
mean, you can cook and fry a lot of a
lot of stuff in these oils,
uh which probably aren't the best thing
for you. But, if you have that blood
sugar elevated,
uh you're going to you're going to
you're going to it lead to systemic
inflammation. Seed oils may push that a
little bit further. I don't know. But,
um Got you. But, but you know, how many
people how are you going to chug a
bottle of seed oil? I mean, give me a
give me I mean, I don't know what people
are doing out there. You know, I don't
eat seed I mean, I maybe
maybe fried foods are in seed oils,
right? But, uh you know, it's just it's
just these kinds of things. I got you.
So, your number one recommendation for
just the average man and woman walking
the street, if you want to slash your
risk of developing cancer, you need to
eliminate highly processed carbohydrate
food and
Or not eliminate them, but uh
significantly reduce them. Got you. And
then, what about your overall
carbohydrate intake on a daily basis?
Would you recommend a low-carb diet, a
ketogenic diet on a daily basis to
reduce the risk of cancer? Well, I think
as I said, like you said at the
beginning, the what did the Aboriginals
do? They never got cancer.
So, they never had any high car highly
processed carbs. That's their society.
Every time you turn the corner, we got a
a fast-food store on the corner. Uh it's
convenient. It's easy. Think about what
we're doing today. We're all on the run.
We're sitting in traffic. How many
millions of our of our citizens are
sitting in traffic, uh not exercising.
And they run home. Uh the kids are in
school all day. The husband, the wife,
they're both working. What are they
going to do? Sit down and say, "Okay,
let's go out in the backyard and
slaughter that goat. We're going to have
him tonight." No, no, no.
Right. And so, what I do when I'm
working Yes, we got DoorDash now. They
even come to your They drop the food off
at your Absolutely. But, you know what?
The the customer's in charge of what
they actually put in their mouth. And
so, when I have when I'm in a pinch and
I go by McDonald's, I'll get six or
seven of the quarter-pound hamburger
patties and then some of the zero-carb
mustard. That's what I eat in a pinch. I
never eat the fries or the bun. Yeah,
yeah, yeah. It's the fries and the buns
that make it so good, though.
For some people, yeah. But, you know
what? What what tastes better to me than
eating the fries and the bun and the
sugar-laden ketchup?
Not having cancer. That tastes better to
me
long-term. You know, people all roll the
dice. You know, we're all hoping we
never get cancer. It's just the way life
is, man. You
just going to Oh, all of a sudden I get
cancer. Now, what am I going to do? Now,
that's where our metabolic therapies
come in uh to take care of it. Bring
your Bring your body back into a state
of a homeo-stasis.
And and try to try to beat it naturally.
Uh I've seen so many people do so well.
Uh they seem to go down the tubes big
time when they get all that radiation
and chemo
uh and all this crazy stuff that we're
doing to these folks. Um when when I'm
not saying we eliminate all that stuff
completely. But, but man, I I tell you,
I I just think there's other ways to go
about doing this. I wish the
establishment would recognize the
science supporting what I'm saying.
Absolutely. What would be your number
two and number three recommendation
other than get rid of the highly
processed junk, eat a low-carb diet?
What's number two and number three?
Well, I mean, exercise for sure. I mean,
we've got to get back to our our our our
species did not sit around all day. I
mean, if you're hungry, you have to go
out and get your food. You know,
DoorDash did not exist in the
Paleolithic times.
So, so there was a lot of uh work and
energy, the fires
I mean, it was just energy. We had to we
had to
do things. Today, as I said, we're a lot
of couch potatoes sitting in traffic,
sitting in front of a computer.
Uh you you got to you got to get and the
stress that's coming from this constant
visual bombardment. Uh people walking
around with the headphones, you know, um
uh we we evolved to be in nature all the
time. Uh we we heard things. We saw
things. Our our brains were geared for
an environment that was often times
hostile, whether whether it was going to
be an animal or one of your own members
of a species trying to kill you. You you
you were always in an environment where
you needed to be aware. Otherwise,
you're going to be food for something
else. And uh you know, I always tell my
students when if you're going to put
headphones in, do it when you're
studying or relaxing. Don't be running
around outside. These kids get run over.
Uh they they they they're in a different
world and even though they're
environment, they're depriving their
brain of the very stimulation that we
evolved to have to be who we are today.
So, um you know, it's just a lot of it's
just common sense, man. I I don't know
what else to say.
One final question.
Um
in the ketogenic community
when you say things like, "Oh, cancer
loves sugar, okay? And and it's going to
thrive and metastasize if you're eating
a high-sugar diet." I always get
especially on Twitter, some smart-ass
always comes back and says, "Well, there
are cancers that can live on ketones and
fatty acids." And I would love your
opinion on that. I tried it. We did
We've been We've been busting our ass
trying to find a tumor cell that can
live on fatty acids and ketones. That
here's the situation. When those when
those guys published those papers they
give them
fatty acids and ketones. Oh, the tumors
look like they're growing. And what else
do those tumor cells have access to?
Glucose and glutamine.
Okay? No, there's no one out there that
has shown me a cell that can live on
fatty acids and ketones without any
glucose or glutamine in the environment.
So, in the studies, they were giving
them ketones and fatty acids, but they
also had access to glucose and
glutamine.
That seems a little disingenuous. Yeah,
well, they didn't know. They don't know.
They don't know that the glucose and
glutamine are the fermentable fuels.
So, and not only this, listen to this,
Ken.
Fatty acids are very interesting. So,
when you when cells like the brain take
in fatty acids, they actually uncouple.
That's why we don't burn too many fatty
acids in our brain because uncoupling
causes heat. We have a skull that will
keep heat inside, we'll get heatstroke.
So, the brain doesn't burn very much
fatty acids. It burns glucose and ketone
bodies. But, other tissues can burn
fatty acids. But, if you give a lot of
fatty acids, fatty acids cause
mitochondrial uncoupling. Okay? Which
which leads to heat. And when you
uncouple, mitochondria automa- the cell
uncoupled will suck in more fermenta-
fermentable fuels. So, the fatty acids
themselves are not in eliciting cancer.
They help the cancer cells get more
fermentable fuels, which makes it look
like the fatty acids are doing it. They
can't. You show me some guy who has a
cell. I've been looking I've I've I've
busted the ass of my students here. Find
me a We're looking We're interrogating
all these cancer cells. Okay,
you put them in glucose and glutamine,
they're fine. You take out glucose and
glutamine, they croak. Then we go
through all the different fuels that
they we can see what they can rescue.
No, fatty acids and ketone bodies cannot
rescue a cell in the absence of glucose
and glutamine.
So, to just to sum that up, there is no
known cancer cell line
that can thrive and metastasize on
ketones and fatty acids. In the absence
of glucose and glutamine.
I think we're going to end on that note
right there. I That that is a grand slam
if I've ever heard one. Dr. Seyfried,
thank you so much for taking the time to
do this. Uh if you're watching this on
YouTube, this was recorded live in front
of our private community. Uh who were
they had a chance to ask questions
directly to Dr. Seyfried who was
gracious enough to answer those
questions. If you want to become a
member of the tribe, there's a link down
in the show notes to sign up. Doc, I
feel like we could talk about this for
another few hours. I need to have you
back on in a few months if that's okay
with you. Yeah, that's fine. You know,
we'll see how it how all this informa-
mation settles. And we're also in the
process very close now uh to submitting
our treatment protocol for cancer. Uh
we've been working on it for several
years now. We want to overturn the the
standard of care what they're doing to
these poor folks and giving them a real
uh how-to manual uh for all oncologists,
all physicians that treat cancer
patients the way they should be treated.
Absolutely. I love it. I can't wait to
get my hands on a copy of that. Thank
you for so much for taking the time.
Doctor, have a good rest of the day.
Thank you very much. Yeah. Thank you.